Title: Free Alternative Lightweight Software for Windows (Part 2)
Date: 2008-10-13 00:00
Author: Chris Kankiewicz
Category: Software
Tags: Avast! Antivirus, CCleaner, Defraggler, Defragler, Open Source, Software, Windows Defender
Slug: free-alternative-lightweight-software-for-windows-part-2

Part 2 of my Free Alternative Lightweight Software for Windows will cover basic
security and performance enhancing/maintenance tools.

I have broken this article into four parts to make it easier on both you, the
reader, and me. As I publish the other sections of this article, I will add a
link to them.

  * Part 1 - [Communication/Business Tools]({filename}free-alternative-lightweight-software-for-windows-part-1.md)
  * **Part 2 - Security/Performance Tools**
  * Part 3 - Media Tools (Never published)
  * Part 4 - Miscellaneous Tools (Never published)


-----


## [Avast! Antivirus](http://www.avast.com/)

**Replaces:** Norton Antivirus, McAffee Antivirus

**Alternatives:** [AVG](http://free.avg.com/), [Avira](http://www.avira.com/)

**Pros:** Unobtrusive, Lightweight, Fast

Avast! antivirus is powerful anti virus software, but, unlike its mainstream
competitors, Norton and McAffee, you’ll barely be able to tell that it’s there.
Avast! is lightweight and unobtrusive, it wont bog down your system and barely
bugs you unless it finds a virus or other malicious code. The home edition of
Avast! is free for 13 months if you register it, and when it expires, all you
have to do is register again to get another 13 months of updates.

[Download Avast! Antivirus](http://www.avast.com/eng/download-avast-home.html) |
[Mirror](http://www.filehippo.com/download_avast_antivirus/)


-----


## [Windows Defender](http://www.microsoft.com/windows/products/winfamily/defender/default.mspx)

**Replaces:** Ad-Aware

**Alternatives:** N/A

**Pros:** Unobtrusive, Lightweight, Fast

What’s that? A product by Microsoft that isn’t a piece of crap? And it’s free to
anyone with Windows XP or Vista?! It’s hard to believe, but it’s true, Windows
Defender is actually a solid product, and free so long as you’re using XP or
Vista. Also, unlike it’s alternatives, Windows Defender never bugs you unless it
finds some malicious software. The one thing I will say that it has working
against it though is that it uses Windows Update for maintaining its spyware
list.

[Download Windows Defender](http://tinyurl.com/dyvaw) |
[Mirror](http://www.filehippo.com/download_microsoft_antispyware/)


-----


## [CCleaner](http://www.piriform.com/ccleaner)

**Replaces:** N/A

**Alternatives:** N/A

**Pros:** Lightweight, Fast, Automation

From CCleaner.com:

> CCleaner is a freeware system optimization, privacy and cleaning tool. It
removes unused files from your system – allowing Windows to run faster and
freeing up valuable hard disk space. It also cleans traces of your online
activities such as your Internet history. Additionally it contains a fully
featured registry cleaner. But the best part is that it’s fast

[Download CCleaner](http://www.ccleaner.com/download) |
[Mirror](http://www.filehippo.com/download_ccleaner/)


-----


## [Defraggler](http://www.piriform.com/defraggler)

**Replaces:** Windows Defrag Tool

**Alternatives:** N/A

**Pros:** Lightweight, Fast

Defraggler is a freeware hard drive defraging tool by Piriform, the same people
who created CCleaner. Defragglers differs from most defrag tools on the market,
by allowing you to easily defrag individual files, without the need to defrag
the whole drive. All you ahve to do is run it, select the file(s) you would like
to defrag and in seconds that file will be fully defragmented. Of course you
always have the option to defrag the whole drive.

[Download Dfraggler](http://www.defraggler.com/download) |
[Mirror](http://www.filehippo.com/download_defraggler/)
